Let's walk through an example of how to configure a team
and plan for the future using the data science heat map.
This particular example comes from one of the teams
that I built from medium-sized organization,
that was just starting out on its data science journey.
Recall that the data science heat map specifies individuals involved in
data science initiatives according to
their specific roles and their levels of experience.
In Year 1, my priority was building prototypes and delivering on
projects that gave quick wins in order to build momentum for the data science practice.
I knew that I needed the most experience and expertise in my data science roles.
As such, I filled two of my open FTEs with data scientists.
One, a master data scientist who could lead many of the efforts of the team.
A second fellow level data scientist who was able to
independently lead many aspects of the initial prototypes.
Our prototypes were embedded in machine learning,
so I needed a skilled machine-learning engineer who I hired at the fellow level.
We built our data science projects into internally focused products.
Fellow level professionals and data
visualization and software engineering also played key roles on that first year team.
At this early stage,
I did not employ any additional adjunct roles.
But I did have the stakeholders, the CEO,
the Chief Data Officer and two functional heads,
the Chief Marketing Officer and the Chief Technological Officer.
In Year 2, I built on the momentum and enthusiasm that we have generated
in Year 1 to better fill out the team for developing hosting models in production.
As such, I added two members to the team.
The first was a fellow level data engineer who could build
professional grade ETL pipelines to bring data from
disparate silos throughout the organization directly to the point of analytics.
I also added a full stack engineer at the fellow level to the team whose role
was critical in building production quality applications with embedded data science.
Year 3 marked a major build-out of our data science footprint,
mainly through adjunct roles to support the work that was now in production.
I added three apprentice level engineers to the team.
One, a full stack engineer,
a second who specialized in front-end engineering,
and a third who specialized in back-end engineering.
I also added a fellow level UI/UX engineer,
as we were now working closely with customers to
get feedback that informed iterations of the product.
As the team's operational scope grew more expansive,
I added a fellow level product manager to manage activities.
Finally, as our product became open to
external customers who access the product through a web interface.
I contracted with a security engineer who was able to address
critical issues around maintaining the security of our product.